---
title: 'An Orbiting Bug'
date: 2024-04-10
permalink: /posts/2013/08/blog-post-2/
---

This is a sample blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

An Orbiting Bug
======

It was 23:14 p.m. I was watching a YouTube course video for HTML and CSS. Usually I put on my headphones, but that night I decided to let it run on my laptop speaker. As the night went on, I heard a buzzing sound above my head. I leaned back and looked up. A bug was circling around the LED bulb chaotically. I've encountered bugs like this before; they keep circling around street lights, LED bulbs, and basically any artificial light. When you look at their behavior, it will seem as if they are attracted to those lights. 

So I did what I used to do: I stood up and went near the switchboard in the room, switched off that light, and switched on the other LED in that room. As expected, the bug flew to the other LED. It’s either the playful child in me or maybe I found it amusing to switch on and off alternate bulbs and make the bug roam around the room. 

Later on the next day, I found an interesting research article about why these nocturnal insects gather around these artificial lights. To understand the cause of this peculiar behavior of these insects, the researchers used high-resolution motion capture in the laboratory and videography in the field to reconstruct the 3D motion of insect flights around artificial lights. It turns out that the insects were not actually flying straight towards the artificial light, as it might appear, giving the impression that they were attracted to the light. 

Instead, they turned their dorsum (the back of an insect) towards the light, generating flight bouts perpendicular (90°) to the brightest object they could see while in flight. Flight bouts refer to the period of time during which the insect engages in flying activity. This peculiar response of these insects is termed the dorsal light response.

Under the natural sky light, i.e., the sun, tilting the dorsum towards the brightest source helps maintain proper flight attitude and control. Near the artificial light, this dorsal response drives the insects to steer around the light mindlessly; the bugs themselves cannot sense the difference between a natural light source and an artificial one. 

They have evolved in such a way that they show their backs toward the light while flying. My amusing activity and the performance by the bug the previous evening showcased the methodology for how people trap these insects in a conserved region under artificial light. 

The previous evening, I observed one more thing when the bug was circling around the artificial light bulb. It felt as if the bug was orbiting around a light source. Now I was able to observe this and find out the reason behind this light response only because the event happened in the room I reside in. What if it was happening 200 meters (m) away? I can use binoculars. That's one plausible way to observe. What if it was a few to 1000 kilometers (km) away? It wouldn’t be easy to see them clearly through binoculars.

But what if I say that in 2016, astronomers indirectly discovered an object eclipsing around a low-mass star named Proxima Centauri, which is 39740000000000 km away in space?

Proxima Centauri (a low-mass star) is 0.12 times the mass of our sun. In simple terms, if you imagine our sun to be a 1 kg watermelon, then Proxima Centauri weighs around 120 g. The observations with instruments at the European Southern Observatory in Chile identified anomalies in Proxima Centauri. So, the ‘How indirectly discovered?’ They had used a method known as doppler spectroscopy. 

Imagine you are standing on a footpath, and you hear the sound of an ambulance arriving towards you. When you notice the sound frequency of the vehicle, it is low when it is far away, the frequency becomes higher while it is arriving and getting nearer to you, and it again goes low while it has passed by. This shift in the sound frequency with respect to you as an observer is called the Doppler shift. 

A similar principle was applied in doppler spectroscopy, where instead of sound, it is the shift in the wavelength of light received from the star. When it is a blue shift, it means the star is closer to us, and when it is a red shift, it means the star is away from us. This shift was the anomaly they observed. 

In 2016, the team led by Anglada-Escudé proposed that the gravitational pull of a terrestrial exoplanet orbiting in the habitable zone of the Proxima Centauri star could explain the change in the motion of the star. How did they know something was orbiting? The shift was periodic. And they announced the discovery of an Earth-like planet named Proxima Centauri b. 

For us human beings, our brains are not wired to apprehend huge numbers. The distance between Earth and Proxima Centauri is 39740000000000 km, or 39,740 Billion km. We just see these numbers as they are; we wouldn’t be able to contemplate such a huge number and make true sense of it. So, let me make it comprehensible. 

Imagine bringing Earth, which is around 12,800 km in diameter, to the size of a raisin (kismis). Let us take it to be around 0.5 cm in size. After sautéing, the size of the earth shrinks to 0.5 cm, and with some flavorful mathematical calculations, the distance between Earth and the star ratio boils down to approximately 3695 km. How far is 3695 km?

If you keep the raisin at the southern tip of India, i.e., Kanyakumari, and the raisin travels towards the north for 3695 km, it’ll stop somewhere in Kyrgyzstan. That is the equivalent distance between Earth and Proxima Centauri. 

Proxima Centauri b is not the only exoplanet. Astronomers have discovered more than 5000 exoplanets as of 2024. The question that pops up is, will we be able to travel to any exoplanet in the future? It’s highly unlikely, but there’s a possibility we might detect signs of intelligent life, still hoping that somewhere something incredible like a Walnut is waiting to be known. 




> References:
> 
> Fabian, Samuel T., et al. “Why flying insects gather at artificial light.” Nature Communications, vol. 15, no. 1, 30 Jan. 2024, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44785-3
> 
> Anglada-Escudé, Guillem, et al. “A terrestrial planet candidate in a temperate orbit around Proxima Centauri.” Nature, vol. 536, no. 7617, Aug. 2016, pp. 437–440, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19106. 
Aren't headings cool?

------
